# Shifts in bird and butterfly communities of Tamhini Wildlife Santurary in the Northern Western Ghats of India.

**Authors:** Shawn Dsouza and Anand Padhye.

## Abstract

The structure of ecological communities depends on multiple processes such as dispersal, selection, speciation and drift. Human disturbance such as habitat modification for agriculture, logging, and infrastructure development can alter these processes at multiple spatial scales, thus changing diversity and community structure. While quantifying the complete effects of human disturbance is challenging, monitoring indicator taxa such as birds and butterflies that are sensitive to environmental change offers valuable insight into both the processes that are affected as well as the efficacy conservation management to mitigate these effects. In this study we analyze the change in bird and butterfly communities of Tamhini wildlife sanctuary in the Northern Western Ghats of India over two decades of changing land use and management. We used line transects to determine abundance of bird and butterfly species at 7 sites with varying habitat and land use characteristics between 2016 and 2017. We then compared our findings to previous surveys conducted by Padhye et al. (2006, 2007) in 1999 - 2001. We observed that species diversity increased for both taxa, however, community composition in all sites was significantly different across years. The degree of trophic and habitat specializations of both taxa remained the same. Despite an apparent increase in species diversity over the years, the underlying structure of both bird and butterfly communities have changed. Thus, the overall change in underlying processes is missed. Changing land use can have effects at multiple trophic levels in the ecosystem. While long-term monitoring of indicator taxa is necessary, managers and decision makers may benefit from looking at metrics beyond mere richness or diversity to ensure preservation of whole ecosystems through dynamic management.
## Citation
